Bezzy communities provide meaningful connections with others living with chronic conditions. Join Bezzy on the web or mobile app.
Can't get enough? Connect with us for all things health.
Poor gut health may manifest as fatigue, upset stomach, skin conditions, and autoimmune challenges. Probiotics, fermented foods, hydration, and stress management can help.
The term “gut microbiome” refers to the microorganisms living in your intestines. Each person has about 200 different species of bacteria, viruses, and fungi in their digestive tract.
Some microorganisms are harmful to our health, but many are incredibly beneficial and even necessary for a healthy body.
Research indicates that having a large variety of bacteria in the gut may help reduce the risk of conditions like: 
In other words, your gut health is often related to your overall health.
The incredible complexity of the gut and its importance to our overall health is a topic of increasing research in the medical community. 
Research over the past few decades has found links between gut health and:
A higher level of diversity in gut bacteria may be associated with improved general mental and physical health. 
Many parts of modern life can affect your gut microbiome, including:
This in turn may affect other aspects of your health, such as:
You may notice a few symptoms if you have reduced gut health. Here are seven of the most common signs:
Stomach disturbances can all be signs of an unhealthy gut. They include:
A balanced gut will have less difficulty processing food and eliminating waste, likely leading to fewer symptoms.
A diet high in processed foods and added sugars can decrease the amount of “good” bacteria and diversity in your gut. 
Research suggests that eating too much sugar may lead to increased inflammation throughout the body. Inflammation can be the precursor to several diseases, including cancer.
If you eat high amounts of sugar, your gut health may be compromised.
Gaining or losing weight without changing your diet or exercise habits may be a sign of an unhealthy gut. An imbalanced gut can impair your body’s ability to absorb nutrients, regulate blood sugar, and store fat.
Weight loss may be caused by malabsorption because of small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO). On the other hand, weight gain may be caused by insulin resistance or increased inflammation.
Research indicates that an imbalance in gut bacteria may be linked to fragmented sleep and short sleep duration, which may lead to chronic fatigue. 
While the cause remains unclear, it appears to be connected to inflammation, metabolic function, and mental health.
Skin conditions like psoriasis may be related to the types of bacteria present in the gut. Lower concentrations of beneficial bacteria may impact the body’s immune system and your skin health. 
Many studies have found connections between the gut and the immune system. 
An unhealthy gut may increase systemic inflammation and alter the proper functioning of the immune system. This may lead to autoimmune diseases, where the body attacks itself mistaking its cells and organs for harmful invaders.
Food intolerances are the result of difficulty digesting certain foods. This is different than a food allergy, which is caused by an immune system reaction to certain foods.
Research indicates that food intolerances, like lactose intolerance, may be caused by poor quality of bacteria in the gut. This can lead to trouble digesting the trigger foods and symptoms like:
There is also some research indicating that food allergies may be related to gut health. 
You may be able to improve and reset your gut health through lifestyle and diet changes. Consider trying one or more of the following to improve your gut health naturally:
Chronic high levels of stress are hard on your whole body, including your gut. This is because your body releases certain hormones when it experiences stress. High levels of these hormones affect your body and may compromise gut health.
Not getting enough or sufficient quality of sleep may have serious impacts on your gut health, which can in turn contribute to more sleep issues.
Try to prioritize getting at least 7–8 hours of uninterrupted sleep per night. Your doctor may be able to help if you have trouble sleeping.
Chewing your food thoroughly and eating your meals more slowly may lower your chances of developing obesity and diabetes while also helping you make better food choices. 
This may help you reduce digestive discomfort and maintain a healthy gut.
Drinking plenty of water may be linked to increased diversity of bacteria in the gut, though the source of the water also matters. 
One 2022 study also found that people who drank more water had less of a type of bacteria that can cause gastrointestinal infections.
Staying hydrated benefits your health overall and can help prevent constipation. It may also be a simple way to promote a healthy gut.
While research is ongoing, adding a prebiotic or probiotic supplement to your diet may help improve your gut health. Prebiotics provide “food” meant to promote the growth of beneficial bacteria in the gut, while probiotics are live good bacteria.
People who have a severe illness or a weakened immune system should not take probiotics. Also, not all probiotic supplements are high quality or beneficial for your health. 
It’s best to speak with a healthcare professional when choosing a probiotic or prebiotic supplement to help improve your health.
You may have a food intolerance if you have symptoms such as:
You can try eliminating common trigger foods to see if your symptoms improve. If you’re able to identify and avoid a food or foods that are contributing to your symptoms, you may see a positive change in your digestive health. 
Reducing the amount of processed, sugary, and high fat foods that you eat may lead to better gut health.
Eating a diet high in fiber likely contributes to a healthy gut microbiome as well. You may also positively impact your gut by eating foods high in micronutrients called polyphenols present in:
Diet and gut health appear to be very closely linked. Avoiding processed foods, high fat foods, and foods high in refined sugars is likely important for maintaining a healthy microbiome, as these foods may promote the growth of damaging bacteria.
You can eat certain foods that actively promote the growth of beneficial bacteria, contributing to your overall health. These superfoods for gut health include:
Research indicates that high fiber foods have a positive impact on gut health. These foods include:
According to a 2019 study in rodents, garlic may increase gut microbiome diversity and improve gut health. 
A small 2018 study of 49 people similarly found that aged garlic extract increased diversity and levels of beneficial bacteria. Still, more research in humans should be done.
Fermented foods are great dietary sources of probiotics. Examples include:
Research suggests that consuming these foods may improve the gut microbiome.
Collagen-rich foods such as bone broth and salmon skin may be beneficial for both overall health and gut health. 
A 2021 study indicated that supplements with collagen may benefit the gut microbiome in mice, though further research is needed.
You could also try to boost your body’s collagen production through your diet. To help your body make collagen, try eating more:
The gut microbiome is affected by many factors, including:
Each of these elements varies in different people, influencing their gut microbiomes in different ways. This variation results in individuals having unique gut microbiomes.
Fasting seems to benefit the gut microbiome, though more research in humans needs to be done.
According to one small 2019 study of 16 people, fasting was linked to lower levels of a bacteria that promotes colorectal cancer.
Research in animals also shows the benefits of fasting. A 2018 study in fruit flies found that intermittent fasting appeared to improve gut health and increase lifespan. Another 2019 study in mice indicated that fasting promoted the growth of beneficial gut bacteria and reduced inflammation in the intestines.
Some studies have found no impact of probiotics on the gut microbiome. Still, other research suggests that probiotics may significantly affect the makeup of the gut microbiome and positively impact other areas of health, like immunity. 
You can improve your gut health by taking steps to improve your overall health. This can include eating more fiber-rich foods, eating fewer ultra-processed foods, getting enough sleep, and managing your stress levels.
Some signs of unbalanced gut bacteria can include upset stomach, unintentional weight changes, and fatigue. 
The human gut is complex. While research is ongoing, it seems clear that the gut microbiome impacts whole-body health. A healthy gut contributes to:
Lifestyle and dietary changes may positively affect not only your gut health but your overall health.
Most kids can get enough omegas from a balanced diet, but fish oil supplements for kids can be useful for those who are picky eaters, when recommended…
L-glutamine supplements may have various health benefits. Learn about our top L-glutamine picks and how they compare.
Meet our team of vitamin, mineral, and supplement testers. We delve into their health goals and experiences.
The number describing a low vitamin D level may vary between individuals. Learn more about numbers to be aware of and other considerations.
Double Wood Supplements offers products that may support various health needs. Learn about the brand's supplements, how they work, and the pros and…
Our dietitian and her toddler put Hiya vitamins to the test. Learn more about Hiya vitamins and whether they're worth considering for your kid. 
Vitamin K1 helps your blood clot and has other health benefits. Most people can get enough vitamin K1 from a healthy diet with dark green leafy…
Vitamin B12 is an essential nutrient that plays many critical roles in the body. Learn about its many health benefits, symptoms of a deficiency, and…
Our gastrointestinal tracts work hard to keep us healthy and happy. When gut health is compromised, we can face major health consequences. Here’s how to use good nutrition to keep your digestion humming along.
“Heal the gut and you heal yourself.” – Gerard E. Mullin, MD
At least 70 million people in the U.S. suffer from some sort of digestive illness (not including heartburn), and digestive problems account for nearly 10% of all healthcare spending.
The hard-working gut allows nutrients and water to enter the body while preventing the entry of toxins/antigens. It’s a selective barrier between “us” and the outside world. But a distressed gut can’t act in our defense. Instead, it allows dangerous compounds to enter the body.
That’s where nutrition can come in. The right diet strengthens the gut in its guardian role, improving overall health and well-being.
If Mama ain’t happy, ain’t nobody happy. Substitute “gut” for “mama” and you pretty much get the picture.
If your gut is distressed, it won’t perform well and you won’t feel good.
A trip to your doctor might end with a diagnosis of irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), leaky gut (LG), celiac disease, food sensitivities, bacterial imbalances – or no specific diagnosis at all, since symptoms often overlap and it can be tricky to untangle the root causes of digestive disorders.  For more on diagnostic criteria, see MayoClinic.org.
What’s unquestionable is that a healthy gut barrier depends on:
If any of these are unstable, your gut won’t be happy – and neither will you.
Factoid: You have more bacteria in your gut than cells in your body!
Bacteria can be classed as harmful or helpful. Beneficial bacteria are like busy tourists in our guts.  They come and go. We don’t have a permanent supply, so for a vibrant gut “economy,” we need to continually replenish them via diet.
Our gut bacteria vary depending on age, gender, diet, geography, hygiene, stress and medication use. Birthing method (C-section vs. vaginal delivery) and first foods (breast milk vs. formula) can also determine what bacteria colonize our gut, with breast milk being an “immunological asset,” because it generally increases the number of friendly bacteria.
Beneficial gut bacteria help manufacture vitamins (B12, K, B6, B5, B3, folate and biotin), enhance absorption of minerals, fight off pathogens, digest food, and metabolize drugs. They even influence total body metabolism!
Using antibiotics can eliminate beneficial bacteria in our gut, creating a prime environment for yeast (Candida albicans) growth.  Candida, in turn, can provoke inflammation and symptoms associated with IBS. (However, as contradictory as this may seem, antibiotics are sometimes used to treat IBS symptoms.)
Reduced beneficial bacteria can also occur with low iron levels and/or a low carbohydrate diet. At the same time, excessive carbohydrate consumption can contribute to small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (the bad kind), aka SIBO. So for folks who suffer from SIBO, a limited carbohydrate and higher protein/fat diet can be useful.
Eating enough fibre may play a significant role in gut health. Fibre resists digestion in the small intestine, then makes its way to the large intestine and ferments, creating short chain fatty acids, an important source of fuel for the body.
Fibre also adds bulk and improves regularity, reducing our exposure to potentially dangerous compounds.  Finally, the breakdown of fibre regulates pH balance, promoting the optimal environment for beneficial bacteria.
Much of what we consume today was unknown to our bodies just 100 years ago.  Some experts speculate that the introduction of these new compounds explains the increase in food intolerance and allergies. Our gut simply can’t handle them!
When the gut wall is irritated or inflamed, the tight junctions between its cells loosen up and we get increased permeability (or leaky gut syndrome). Inflammation, stress, pharmaceuticals, bacterial balance, malnutrition, compounds in food (gluten, casein, lectins, fructose, etc), and food additives (including MSG) can all influence the junctions in our gut and weaken their bonds.
A leaky gut isn’t very selective.  It might slam the door on beneficial nutrients while welcoming dangerous bacteria inside. This is called bacterial translocation, or BT. It can stimulate an immune response or inflammation, and it burdens the brain and liver.
A leaky gut often goes along with conditions such as:
Although causal relationships aren’t established, researchers hypothesize that certain compounds (e.g., gluten, casein) cross the leaky gut and provoke an antigenic response, leading to central nervous system dysfunctions.
Our gut communicates with all cells in the body, which means that disturbances in the gut can show up as disturbances in the brain (and vice versa). As a matter of fact, the brain actually kicks off digestion before the gut — we secrete acids and digestive enzymes before even swallowing the first bite of a meal!
When you’re afraid, your brain and gut know, and your digestion slows down. Ever had the experience of not being able to eat when you’re feeling especially anxious? That’s because blood flow and enzyme production in the gut are limited during stress.
At rest, the gut receives over half of all organ blood flow, but during exercise, blood flow to the gut can drop to less than 20% of this resting value.  Lack of blood flow to the gut during digestion can lead to increased intestinal permeability.
Ironically, both endurance exercisers and people with heart failure are susceptible to leaky gut syndrome; in each case (though for entirely different reasons) not enough blood is making it to the gut.
It’s important to note that symptoms of a disturbed gut can show up outside the gut itself, manifesting as seemingly unrelated symptoms such as:
Serious gut pathologies often result in weight loss and nutrient deficiencies (since malabsorption is occurring).
Often, it’s the foods we eat. Foods that are healthful for some people might not be healthful for you. Four common offenders:
For some, these compounds can induce mast cells to produce histamine, mimicking a food allergy and increasing intestinal permeability and inflammation. Or they can mimic symptoms of respiratory allergies, such as sneezing, sniffles, and throat irritation.
For others, these foods stimulate an immune system T-cell response and create or exacerbate autoimmune symptoms such as joint pain or skin rashes (particularly eczema).
Other people simply lack the appropriate digestive enzymes to process one or more of these compounds. In this case, you might just get a general stomach upset, gas and bloating, nausea, and constipation or diarrhea.
Interestingly, some of the foods that contain these compounds can have addictive properties, creating an immediate feeling of well-being.  So, while your gut might not be suited to digest casein, right after you drink milk you get a rush of “feel good time”, only to soon be reminded of the gut upset that follows.
“The intestinal barrier operates as the biological door to inflammation, autoimmunity and cancer.” – Allesio Fasano, MD
Get to the root cause. While there can be many causes of gut troubles, there is always a cause.  Identify it before you mask symptoms with medications.
Eliminate any foods/drinks you know to be problematic.  Do this on your own (see here: DigestiveWellnessBook.com and How To Do an Elimination Diet) or set up an elimination diet with a professional.
Balance your bacteria.  Beneficial bacteria strengthen the intestinal barrier.  Choose 1-2 probiotic/prebiotic rich foods/drinks and consume them regularly.  See here for ideas: All About Probiotics 
Eat when hungry, stop when satisfied.  If someone is having gut problems (and still gaining body fat), the first place to look is overconsumption of sugars, processed grains, processed meats, dairy, and rich meals.
Sugar alcohols can wreak havoc in the gut. If you are struggling with bloating and cramping, eliminating sugar alcohols might be a wise place to start (think sugar free desserts, gum, protein powders, protein bars, etc).
Slow down.  The process of slowing down and chewing is important for enzyme release and breaking food down into particles that are manageable for the gut.
Consider glutamine.  Glutamine can help reverse excessive intestinal permeability, act as fuel for intestinal cells, and might attenuate the allergic response.
Consider digestive enzyme supplements. Look for a broad-based multi-enzyme formula. Many of us produce less hydrochloric acid — a key digestive component of our stomachs — as we age; look for a formula that includes betaine HCl. (However, if this type of formula gives you heartburn, stick to the regular enzyme supplements without betaine.)
Check vitamin D levels.  Low vitamin D status might decrease immune function and is associated with IBD.
Check iron levels.  Decreased iron status is associated with poor gut function. This can result from gut malabsorption with the consumption of mineral-binding foods such as grains and legumes, or simply a low iron intake. Vegetarians/vegans and endurance athletes are especially prone to this.
Supplement wisely. Natural compounds that might help gut health include St. John’s Wort, melatonin, curcumin (turmeric), Iberis amara, chamomile, arrowroot, peppermint, Boswellia carterii, artichoke leaf, clove, zinc, quercetin, gamma oryzanol, licorice root, CoQ10, phosphatidylcholine, aloe vera and psyllium. But ideally, solve the underlying problem (e.g. digestive intolerance) first.
Eat plenty of omega-3s (flax, walnuts, hemp, chia, fish, algae) and other whole food fats (olives, avocado, coconut, nuts, seeds, etc) to help moderate inflammation.  Also note that medium chain fats, found in coconut, can also help with gut health.
Flavonoids (this includes isoflavones, anthocyanidins, flavones, flavonols, flavan-3-ols and flavonones) can help improve gut health.  Fruits, vegetables, beans (including soy), tea and coffee are the major sources of flavonoids in the human diet.  Foods in the cabbage family and vegetable broths can also help here. On the other hand, if FODMAPs are a problem for you, choose carefully, as some of these foods may cause more trouble.
Recover well. Sleep, stress management (e.g., meditation, yoga) and exercise are necessary for renewal of the body and controlling inflammation.  Improving these areas may improve gut health.   Remember that excessive exercise can lead to poor gut health.  Avoid big meals before exercise.
Eat real food. Our bodies have a longstanding relationship with whole/real foods.  Food preservatives and additives, on the other hand, present a new (and perhaps impossible) challenge for our bodies.
Get fibre. Nutrient-dense, high-fibre carbohydrates like vegetables are important in the diet. Eat your veggies! And if you’re like most Westerners, you probably need more fibre.  Try beans, peas, vegetables, nuts, seeds, fruits and whole grains.  For more see here: All About Fibre
Breast-feed.  Children who are breast-fed tend to have less gastrointestinal infections and inflammatory disorders.
These harm our healthy bacteria, disrupt the delicate chemical ecosystem of our GI tracts, and/or cause additional gut damage (e.g. NSAIDs can cause GI bleeding).
Reduce your chemical burden.  Choose organic when possible, avoid heating foods in plastics, use clean body products, avoid food colorings/preservatives and avoid fish high in toxins.
When ya gotta go, ya gotta go. If you need to evacuate your colon, do it. Avoid waiting.  One to three bowel movements per day = good.
If the vagus nerve (which connects brain to gut) is cut, the gut functions fine on its own.
You have more nerve cells in your bowel than in your spine.
AGEs may enter the body more readily if someone has a LG.  For more see here: All About Cooking and Carcinogens
Gerd Gigerenzer (German psychologist) said the enteric nervous system is the intelligence of the unconscious.
Click here to view the information sources referenced in this article.
Bowe WP & Logan AC.  Acne vulgaris, probiotics and the gut-brain-skin axis – back to the future?  Gut Pathogens 2011;3:1.
Maes M, et al.  Increased IgA and IgM responses against gut commensals in chronic depression: Further evidence for increased bacterial translocation or leaky gut. J Affect Disord 2012.
Lipinski E.  Digestive Wellness. 4th Edition.  2012.  McGraw Hill.
Lattimer JM & Haub MD.  Effects of dietary fibre and its components on metabolic health.  Nutrients 2010;2:1266-1289.
Suzuki T & Hara H.  Role of flavonoids in intestinal tight junction regulation.  J of Nutritional Biochem 2011;22:401-408.
Kussmann M & Van Bladeren PJ.  The extended nutrigenomics – understanding the interplay between the genomes of food, gut microbes, and human host.  Front Gene 2011;21:13 pages.
Krack A, et al.  The importance of the gastrointestinal system in the pathogenesis of heart failure.  Eur Heart Journal 2005;26:2368-2374.
Monk JM, et al.  Recent advances in the field of nutritional immunology.  Expert Rev Clin Immunol 2011;7:747-749.
Karper WB.  Intestinal permeability, moderate exercise, and older adult health.  Holist Nurs Pract 2011;25:45-48.
Ulluwishewa D, et al.  Regulation of tight junction permeability by intestinal bacteria and dietary components.  J Nutr 2011;141:769-776.
Festi D, et al.  Gut microbiota and its pathophysiology in disease paradigms.  Dig Dis 2011;29:518-524.
Groschwitz K & Hogan SP.  Intestinal barrier function: Molecular regulation and disease pathogenesis.  J Allergy Clin Immunol 2009;124:3-20.
Rahimi R & Abdollahi M.  Herbal medicines for the management of irritable bowel syndrome: A comprehensive review.  World J Gastroenterol 2012;18:589-600.
Yoon SL, et al.  Management of irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) in adults: Conventional and complementary/alternative approaches.  Altern Med Rev 2011;16:134-151.
Kiefer D & Ali-Akbarian L.  A brief evidence-based review of two gastrointestinal illnesses: irritable bowel and leaky gut syndromes.  Alternative Therapies in Health and Medicine 2004;10:3.
Duncan SH, et al.  Reduced dietary intake of carbohydrates by obese subjects results in decreased concentrations of butyrate and butyrate-producing bacteria in feces.  Appl Environ Microbiol 2007;73:1073-1078.
Catalioto RM, et al.  Intestinal epithelial barrier dysfunction in disease and possible therapeutical interventions. Current Medicinal Chemistry 2011;18:398-426.
Mullin GE & Swift KM.  The Inside Tract.  Rodale.  2011.
Email correspondence with Dr. Bryan Walsh.  5/17/12.
Email correspondence with Veronica Porterfield.  5/17/12.
Carbonero F, et al.  Contributions of the microbial hydrogen economy to colonic homeostasis.  Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 2012 May 15.
Villarreal AA, et al.  Use of broad-spectrum antibiotics and the development of irritable bowel syndrome.  WMJ 2012;111:17-20.
Ghoshal UC, et al.  The gut microbiota and irritable bowel syndrome: friend or foe?  International Journal of Inflammation 2012;2012:13 pages.
Liu Z, Li N, Neu J. Tight junctions, leaky intestines, and pediatric diseases.  Acta Paediatrica 2005;94:386-393.
Kau AL, et al.  Human nutrition, the gut microbiome, and immune system: envisioning the future. Nature 2012;474:327-336.
Ananthakrishnan AN, et al. Higher predicted vitamin D status is associated with reduced risk of Crohn’s disease.  Gastroenterology. 2012;142:482-489.
Queipo-Ortuno MI, et al.  Influence of red wine polyphenols and ethanol on the gut microbiota ecology and biochemical biomarkers.  Am J Clin Nutr 2012;95:1323-1334.
Rodriguez-Reyna TS, et al.  Rheumatic manifestations of inflammatory bowel disease.  World J Gastroenterol 2009;15:5517-5524.
Huang BL, et al.  Skin manifestations of inflammatory bowel disease.  Frontiers in Physiology/Gastrointestinal Sciences 2012;3.
Konturek PC, et al.  Stress and the gut: Pathophysiology, clinical consequences, diagnostic approach and treatment options.  Journal of Physiology and Pharmacology 2011;62:591-599.
Shreffler W, Yuan Q, Asp K.  Understanding your food allergies & intolerances. 2012. St. Martin’s Paperbacks.
Yep, we know… the health and fitness world can sometimes be a confusing place. But it doesn’t have to be.
Let us help you make sense of it all with this free special report.
In it you’ll learn the best eating, exercise, and lifestyle strategies — unique and personal — for you.
Click here to download the special report, for free.
Get life-changing resources delivered right to your inbox. (Read by 1 million people weekly.)
Welcome to PN! Your first awesome email is on its way.
Sign up for occasional texts about special offers, too!
Enjoy the PN content and exclusive offers headed your way.
An official website of the United States government

The .gov means it’s official.

            Federal government websites often end in .gov or .mil. Before
            sharing sensitive information, make sure you’re on a federal
            government site.
          

The site is secure.

            The https:// ensures that you are connecting to the
            official website and that any information you provide is encrypted
            and transmitted securely.
          

      
      The gut microbiota is now considered as one of the key elements contributing to the regulation of host health. Virtually all our body sites are colonised by microbes suggesting different types of crosstalk with our organs. Because of the development of molecular tools and techniques (ie, metagenomic, metabolomic, lipidomic, metatranscriptomic), the complex interactions occurring between the host and the different microorganisms are progressively being deciphered. Nowadays, gut microbiota deviations are linked with many diseases including obesity, type 2 diabetes, hepatic steatosis, intestinal bowel diseases (IBDs) and several types of cancer. Thus, suggesting that various pathways involved in immunity, energy, lipid and glucose metabolism are affected.In this review, specific attention is given to provide a critical evaluation of the current understanding in this field. Numerous molecular mechanisms explaining how gut bacteria might be causally linked with the protection or the onset of diseases are discussed. We examine well-established metabolites (ie, short-chain fatty acids, bile acids, trimethylamine N-oxide) and extend this to more recently identified molecular actors (ie, endocannabinoids, bioactive lipids, phenolic-derived compounds, advanced glycation end products and enterosynes) and their specific receptors such as peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPARα) and gamma (PPARγ), aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), and G protein-coupled receptors (ie, GPR41, GPR43, GPR119, Takeda G protein-coupled receptor 5).Altogether, understanding the complexity and the molecular aspects linking gut microbes to health will help to set the basis for novel therapies that are already being developed.
    


          Keywords:
        
      
      intestinal barrier function; intestinal microbiology; liver; obesity; probiotics.
    

    © Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2022. Re-use permitted under CC BY. Published by BMJ.
  
Competing interests: PDC and WMdV are inventors on patent applications dealing with the use of Akkermansia muciniphila and its components in the treatment of metabolic disorders. PDC and WMdV are co-founders of A-Mansia Biotech. PDC is co-founder of Enterosys. WMdV is co-founder of Caelus Health and inventor on patents on the use of Eubacterium hallii.
 Total abundance of bacteria according to the different body sites. Bounds for bacteria… 
 Molecules and metabolites produced by the gut microbiota according to the nutrients or… 
 Molecular mechanisms linking gut microbiota and host health in both healthy and pathological… 
 Colonocytes and endocrine cells express a variety of receptors able to sense and… 
The PubMed wordmark and PubMed logo are registered trademarks of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). Unauthorized use of these marks is strictly prohibited.
National Library of Medicine
8600 Rockville Pike
                  Bethesda, MD 20894
